ANTOINE LAVOISIER: This way please, gentlemen.
Messieurs, it is my great ambition to demonstrate that nature is a closed system,
that in any transformation, no amount of matter, no mass, is ever lost, and none is gained.
Over here, please.
This precise amount of water is heated
to steam. This steam is brought into contact with a red hot iron barrel
embedded in the coals. From this end, we cool the steam, but, interestingly, we collect less water than
we started with. So clearly we lose a certain amount of water. However, we also collect
a gas, and the weight of the iron barrel increases. Now, when we combine these two increases,
the new weight of the iron barrel and the gas we have collected, they are exactly equal
to the weight of the lost water. MEMBER OF ACADEMY: Aha! But is it atmospheric air, Monsieur Lavoisier?
ANTOINE LAVOISIER: No, no because I am measuring it, to the very last grain,
I can see that it is lighter than the air around us, and moreover, it is flammable.
Voila. DAVID BODANIS: Water is made out of hydrogen and oxygen. So what he had done is
get the oxygen to stick to the inside of a red hot iron rifle barrel. He was basically
just making rust, which is oxygen iron, but he was making the rust really quickly. Now
that left the hydrogen— what he called combustible "air"—and that was just floating around
as a gas. No mass had been lost, it had merely been transformed, and now he wanted to transform
it all back into water. ANTOINE LAVOISIER: This is only the beginning. In the next few
months, I hope to demonstrate that I can recombine this combustible air with vital air and transform
them both back into water. I will recreate exactly the same amount of water that was
lost here in this process. It is my hope to complete the cycle, water into gas into water,
and not a drop lost. DAVID BODANIS: For a long time, Lavoisier had suspected that the
exact amount of matter, the mass, involved in any transformation was always conserved.
But to prove this he had to perform thousands of experiments, and he had to do the measurements
with incredible accuracy. That's where his great wealth from being a tax collector came
in. He could afford to commission the most sensitive instruments ever built. He became
obsessed with accuracy.
NARRATOR: For years the Lavoisier's burned, chopped, melted and boiled every conceivable
substance. They'd shown that as long as one is scrupulous about collecting all the vapors,
liquids and powders created in a transformation then mass is not decreased. Liquids might
become gases, metals may rust, wood may become ash and smoke, but matter, the tiny atoms
that make up all substances, none of it is ever lost. The crowning glory of this opus
was their remarkable use of static electricity to cause oxygen and hydrogen to recombine
back into water.